- Highlights & Notes
    - (page 3) High Intensity Interval Training (HIIT) allows more people to see measurable improvement in as few as 14 days with just 3 sessions of 20 minute workouts each week.
    - (page 3) This workout involves brief intervals of extremely high intensity activity alternated with recovery periods that are repeated for a total of only 20 to 30 minutes of exercise.
    - (page 5) HIIT or High Intensity Interval Training is a specific type of athletic workouts that alternate quick, intense bursts of exercise followed by short recovery periods.
    - (page 5) The real key to HIIT is that the intense phase of the exercise is done at nearly 100% effort and the recovery phase is movement at 60% to 70% of maximum effort, still within the fat burning range.
    - (page 5) The basic features setting HIIT apart from other workout routines include: • HIIT uses all major muscle groups • Is performed only 3 times per week • Alternates cardio and full-body power moves • Takes only 20 to 30 minutes • Maximizes weight loss without loss of muscle mass
    - (page 7) It was discovered that an athlete suffers exhaustion and lactic acid build-up when performing different activities even though the work level was the same as the workout that was ‘easy’.
    - (page 8) Everyone puts in as close to 100% intensity as possible
    - (page 8) Another tremendous advantage of HIIT workouts is that they are quick and can be done anytime and anywhere
    - (page 9) High Intensity Interval Training involves coordinated effort of all the body’s muscle groups and systems to bring about the most rapid weight loss (if that is the intention) while improving strength, endurance and overall physical ability.
    - (page 9) Simply raising the heart rate is not enough – HIIT requires true all-out effort that should leave you exhausted at the end of the workout.
    - (page 9) When done properly, HIIT offers many benefits over other, more traditional types of cardio workouts and other exercise programs. • Increases metabolism: The intensity of the HIIT workout boosts metabolism for up to 48 hours after completing a full routine. Production of Human Growth Hormone (HGH) is stimulated which helps to increase caloric burn, especially fat, as well as slows the aging process. • Increases ‘afterburn effect’: HIIT sessions increase the body’s need for oxygen during recovery – ‘Excess Post-Exercise Oxygen Consumption’ (EPOC) – which helps burn more fat and calories than even-paced workouts of a long duration or traditional aerobic activity. • Improves aerobic capacity in about 2 weeks as much as 6 to 8 weeks of traditional endurance training. • Improves heart health: HIIT gets you to the anaerobic zone quicker and more efficiently. • Reduces blood-sugar levels in Type 2 diabetics in as little as 2 weeks. • Eliminates exercise boredom: Short intervals and the incorporation of many different types of activities keep HIIT workouts fresh and motivating. • Challenging: With short-term goals, it is easy to see progress and feel success. • Quick: HIIT workouts should not last more than 20 or 30 minutes so they can fit into anyone’s schedule. • Convenient: HIIT can be performed anywhere with a minimum of equipment or just your own body weight so it is great for at home, on the road or in the gym.
    - (page 11) Although HIIT workouts can be devised with any activity utilizing timed intervals of intense work and recovery, there are several programs with specific guidelines.
    - (page 11) The Fartlek Method is essentially interval training and can be adapted to virtually any activity although it was originally designed to improve the performance of runners. The main point of this method is to vary the intensity of portions of your workout, alternating slow and moderate paced movement with maximum intensity bursts. Speed and intensity can be adjusted along with actual duration of activity and rest periods that imitate competitive action.
    - (page 11) Fartlek works both the aerobic and anaerobic systems and reduces the boredom of steady-paced activity such as running, swimming or biking. Timing can be an issue, especially when you want to do multiple sets so a coach, partner or pre-recorded play-list are ways to stay on track.
    - (page 11) Ideally, the athlete performs at 170% of VO2max in alternating intervals of 20 seconds work and 10 seconds of recovery for 8 to 10 sets. A full Tabata workout actually lasts only 4 to 5 minutes (after a 5 minute warm up) due to the extreme exertion required and should be done only 2 to 4 times per week.
        - Tabata
    - (page 106) What is VO2max? VO2max refers to the maximum amount of oxygen a person can utilize during intense exercise and is the measure of an athlete’s cardiovascular fitness and level of endurance.
    - (page 11) The ‘Gibala Regimen’, also known as ‘The Little Method’ has two workout programs suitable for both athletes and beginners. Studied at McMaster University, Canada, this method involves 3 minutes of warm up, and intervals of 60 seconds of intense activity (95% of VO2 max) followed by 75 seconds of rest with 8 to 12 reps. The ‘lighter’ approach uses the same warm up but intervals of 60 seconds of work (80-95% of VO2 max) with 60 seconds of recovery and a cool down period. This method can be performed 3 times per week.
    - (page 12) The ‘10-20-30’ program, devised by Danish researchers whose study was published in 2012, has also proven to have tremendous results regarding overall endurance training, reducing blood pressure and cholesterol in athletes and casual participants. This protocol involves a 5 minute warm up and intervals of 30 seconds of low intensity, 20 seconds of medium intensity and 10 seconds of high intensity repeated 5 times, followed by 2 minutes of rest and repeated for a total of 4 or 5 sets, all of which are completed within 20 to 30 minutes.
    - (page 13) Essentially, HIIT combines the concepts of interval and cross training for an overall, full-body workout at an intense level for maximum calorie burn and long-term residual effects. To compare HIIT to either type of workout – just intervals or just cross training - is to look at only half the picture. Additionally, any activity such as running or weight lifting that targets just one area or basic set of motions is incomplete in terms of overall fitness.
    - (page 13) Several examples that can be used as part of a HIIT plan include: CrossFit is a program that was developed by combining different types of fitness training to achieve the most significant overall fitness results without over-emphasizing any one particular area. CrossFit’s broad focus applies to the improvement of agility, balance, cardio-vascular endurance, muscle strength, power, speed and stamina. It is a gym-based program that utilizes a wide range of equipment and the input of trainers.
    - (page 13) MetCon3 at Senergy Fitness is another intense workout that combines strength training and anaerobic conditioning drills. This is a circuit-style timed workout performed in a gym with a combination of 4 to 10 exercises repeated in multiple rounds with little rest. The goal is to complete as many reps as possible within the time allowed while maintaining good form and remaining near your anaerobic threshold.
    - (page 13) Turbo Fire (HIIT) and the Insanity Workout provides high-energy cardio exercise without the use of exercise machines or other pieces of equipment so it can be enjoyed in a class or at home. While Turbo Fire incorporates HIIT philosophy, it is not a complete HIIT program. It focuses on cardio kickboxing while the Insanity Workout involves calisthenics, cardio, plyometrics and sports drills.
    - (page 13) Zumba and dance fitness classes enjoy a great deal of popularity because they are fun and can be done in a class or at home with the help of a video or DVD. The drawback in terms of overall fitness is that these activities are primarily cardio and don’t address muscle strength or different muscle groups. Concerns with HIIT Programs The obvious concern regarding High Intensity Interval Training is, of course, the intensity.
    - (page 13) Zumba and dance fitness classes enjoy a great deal of popularity because they are fun and can be done in a class or at home with the help of a video or DVD. The drawback in terms of overall fitness is that these activities are primarily cardio and don’t address muscle strength or different muscle groups.
    - (page 15) The obvious concern regarding High Intensity Interval Training is, of course, the intensity. You must be in relatively good health and at a respectable fitness level before tackling the demands of HIIT.
    - (page 15) many options for workout disciplines, you can find those that create the least stress or discomfort. For example, a stationary bike or swimming can be much easier for many people than running.
    - (page 15) Using resistance bands instead of weights presents another option that better suits some preferences and ability levels.
    - (page 15) Intensity is measured differently for every individual and there are plenty of HIIT plans that allow you to get used to the demands of the program at your own pace. The beauty of HIIT is that is incorporates intense and moderate activity in a simple ratio so if you can’t sustain the hard work for 1 minute, aim for just 30 seconds and set your ‘recovery’ period accordingly. (Intervals and timing will be discussed in later chapters.).
    - (page 15) Another area for concern with HIIT workouts is nutrition. It is important to understand not only your body’s overall caloric needs but also the sources of those calories in order to properly fuel your muscles for the demands you will place on them. HIIT creates much more complex physiological reactions within the body than traditional exercise routines.
